Adds WebSocket support (#1203)
wasp-lang/wasp: web/docs/guides/websockets.md

---
title: WebSockets
---
import useBaseUrl from '@docusaurus/useBaseUrl';

# WebSocket support
Wasp provides a fully integrated WebSocket experience by utilizing [Socket.IO](https://socket.io/) on the client and server. We handle making sure your URLs are correctly setup, CORS is enabled, and provide a useful `useSocket` abstraction for use in React components.

> 

Reviewer: Maybe we could mention here, as a NOTE, that if you want, you can still roll your own sockets, via `serverSetupFn`?

Reviewer 2: The most advanced users that might want that will probably figure out that they can do it anyways? It might confuse the not so advanced users.

Reviewer: Yes, or if they have some special needs. But you decide, if you think it is redundant and clutters the docs here, let's skip, it is ok with me.

> ## Enable in Wasp file

Reviewer: Could we, before we dive into details, give a quick overview of needed steps?
We could say smth like:
1. Define your socket logic on the server.
2. Declare you are using sockets in wasp file + connect it to the server logic you defined.
3. Use them on the client, in React, via `useSocket`.
4. Optional: defines types for messages.

Maybe there shouldn't be (4), this is just an idea.

Author: Yep I can add a quick overview

Here, we specify we are using WebSockets by adding `webSocket` to our `app` and providing the required `fn`. You can optionally specify a list of `entities` for use in your context (like in operations).

```wasp title=todoApp.wasp
app todoApp {
  // ...

  webSocket: {
    fn: import { webSocketFn } from "@server/webSocket.js"
    // Optional: entities: [...]
  },,
}
```

## Optional: Add shared types for client and server use

> If TypeScript is your thing, you can add shared interface definitions to use on both the client and server. This allows you to type all the messages you send and receive!

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
If you are using Typescript you can add shared interface definitions to use on both the client and server. This allows you to type all the messages you send and receive!
```

```ts title=src/shared/webSocket.ts
import { WaspSocketData } from '@wasp/universal/types'

export interface ServerToClientEvents {
  chatMessage: (msg: { id: string, username: string, text: string }) => void;
}

export interface ClientToServerEvents {
  chatMessage: (msg: string) => void;
}

export interface InterServerEvents { }

// Data that is attached to the socket.

> // NOTE: Wasp automatically injects the JWT into the connection,

Reviewer 2: Saying `JWT` here feels bit low level, I would maybe say "auth info" or something like that so people don't need to think too hard.

// and if present/valid, the server adds a user to the socket.
export interface SocketData extends WaspSocketData { }
```

## Add server support

> On the server, you will get `io` argument and `context` for your WebSocket function. You can use this `io` object to register callbacks for all the regular Socket.IO events.

Reviewer: Will they know what is this `io` object? Is it something they would normally get from socket.io? Could we link to what this object is, maybe link to its type on socket.io or its docs or something?

Reviewer: You don't say much about `context`?

Author: I think they should, but I can link to Socket.IO docs for `io`. I can mention `context` will contain entities. And yeah, I can note the user on socket 👍🏻

```ts title=src/server/webSocket.ts
import { v4 as uuidv4 } from 'uuid'
import { WebSocketDefinition } from '@wasp/webSocket'
import { ServerToClientEvents, ClientToServerEvents, InterServerEvents, SocketData } from '../shared/webSocket'

export const webSocketFn: WebSocketDefinition<
  ClientToServerEvents,
  ServerToClientEvents,
  InterServerEvents,
  SocketData
> = (io, context) => {
  io.on('connection', (socket) => {
    const username = socket.data.user?.email || socket.data.user?.username || 'unknown'
    console.log('a user connected: ', username)

    socket.on('chatMessage', async (msg) => {
      console.log('message: ', msg)
      io.emit('chatMessage', { id: uuidv4(), username, text: msg })
    })
  })
}
```

## Add client support

> Client access to WebSockets is provided by the `useSocket` abstraction. It returns:

Reviewer: What if they want to use `socket` directly, without `useSocket`, should we allow them that? What if they want to make connection conditional, and have it connected only sometimes / when used? Hm this sounds like reasonable request, have socket connected only when used. I am not saying we have to support all this, but would love to explore use cases a bit.

Ok let's imagine this: I have an app which has a chat in it. Chat is used only sometimes. So with this PR, all instances of my Wasp app will maintain active connection, even though possibly only 1% of them is using the socket? Could that be an issue? Is there a limit to number of socket connections that can even be opened?

Author: Ok, so I pulled `refreshAuthToken` up to the module level, exported it and `socket`, and added an `autoConnect` option. So this effectively does 1 and 2, and they can now support your use case by setting `autoConnect: false` and then manually calling `socket.connect()`/`socket.disconnect()` in the component that needs it 👍🏻

Author: But by default, we will still just have `autoConnect` be `true`

Reviewer: oh ok that is pretty cool now, sounds good!

Could you elaborate a bit more on the clustering? I don't know the problem you are talking about, maybe you can explain it to me in a bit more detail here? Sounds to me like we should create an issue for this so we can track it in GH?

Author: I have a note in the code with a link, but essentially the servers will need to talk to each other if you want all messages to go to everyone. Additionally, if using long polling, we would need sticky session.

For example:
- https://socket.io/docs/v4/using-multiple-nodes
- https://socket.io/docs/v4/cluster-adapter/

If it needs a full issue just let me know 👍🏻 But as of now, this works for number of server containers = 1, not > 1.

Reviewer: Ok sounds good -> please create a full Github issue for this, so we can track it!

Author: https://github.com/wasp-lang/wasp/issues/1228

- `socket: Socket` for sending and receiving events.
- `isConnected: boolean` for showing a display of the Socket.IO connection status.

>   - Note: Wasp automatically connects establishes a WebSocket connection from the client to the server, so you do not need to explicitly `socket.connect()` or `socket.disconnect()`. All components using `useSocket` share the same underlying `socket`.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
  - Note: Wasp automatically connects and establishes a WebSocket connection from the client to the server, so you do not need to explicitly `socket.connect()` or `socket.disconnect()`. All components using `useSocket` share the same underlying `socket`.
```

> - `refreshAuthToken: () => void` for refreshing the auth token on the `socket` when login status changes.

Reviewer: Should we use this somewhere in our Auth logic?

Reviewer: yes, on login for example.

Although, if we do the listener thing in api.ts, then that should be enough.

  - Note: This function is automatically called when components using `useSocket` mount. It will attach the JWT, if it exists, and parse it on the server. If a valid JWT existed, you will have a `socket.data.user` on the server.

```ts title=src/client/Chat.tsx
import React, { useEffect, useRef, useState } from 'react'
import { useSocket } from '@wasp/webSocket'
import { ClientToServerEvents, ServerToClientEvents } from '../shared/webSocket'

export const ProfilePage = () => {
  const [messages, setMessages] = useState<{ id: string, username: string, text: string }[]>([]);
  const { socket, isConnected } = useSocket<ServerToClientEvents, ClientToServerEvents>()

>   const inputRef = useRef<HTMLInputElement>(null)

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
  const [message, setMessage] = useState('')
```

  useEffect(() => {
    socket.on('chatMessage', logMessage)

    return () => {
      socket.off('chatMessage', logMessage)
    }
  }, [])

  function logMessage(msg: { id: string, username: string, text: string }) {
    setMessages((priorMessages) => [msg, ...priorMessages])
  }

  function handleSubmit(e: React.FormEvent<HTMLFormElement>) {
    e.preventDefault()

    if (inputRef.current !== null) {

>       socket.emit('chatMessage', inputRef.current.value)

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
      socket.emit('chatMessage', message)
```

      inputRef.current.value = ''
    }
  }

  const messageList = messages.map((msg) => <li key={msg.id}><em>{msg.username}</em>: {msg.text}</li>)
  const connectionIcon = isConnected ? '🟢' : '🔴'

  return (
    <>
      <h2>Chat</h2>
      <div>
        <form onSubmit={handleSubmit}>
          <div className="flex space-x-4 place-items-center">
            <div>{connectionIcon}</div>

>             <div><input type="text" ref={inputRef} /></div>

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
            <div><input type="text" value={message} onChange={event => setMessage(event.target.value)} /></div>
```

---
title: WebSockets
---
import useBaseUrl from '@docusaurus/useBaseUrl';

# WebSocket support
Wasp provides a fully integrated WebSocket experience by utilizing [Socket.IO](https://socket.io/) on the client and server. We handle making sure your URLs are correctly setup, CORS is enabled, and provide a useful `useSocket` abstraction for use in React components.

To get started, you need to:

> 1. Define your WebSocket logic on the server
> 1. Declare you are using WebSockets in your Wasp file, and connect it with your server logic
> 1. Use WebSockets on the client, in React, via `useSocket`
> 1. Optionally define the types for messages for use on the client and server

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1. Define your WebSocket logic on the server.
2. Declare you are using WebSockets in your Wasp file, and connect it with your server logic.
3. Use WebSockets on the client, in React, via `useSocket`.
4. Optionally define the types for messages for use on the client and server.
```

# WebSocket support
Wasp provides a fully integrated WebSocket experience by utilizing [Socket.IO](https://socket.io/) on the client and server. 

We handle making sure your URLs are correctly setup, CORS is enabled, and provide a useful `useSocket` and `useSocketListener` abstractions for use in React components.

To get started, you need to:
1. Define your WebSocket logic on the server.
2. Declare you are using WebSockets in your Wasp file, and connect it with your server logic.
3. Use WebSockets on the client, in React, via `useSocket` and `useSocketListener`.
4. Optionally, type the WebSocket events and payloads for full-stack type safety.

We will cover all the steps above, but in an order that makes it easier to explain new concepts.

## Turn on WebSockets in your Wasp file
We specify that we are using WebSockets by adding `webSocket` to our `app` and providing the required `fn`. You can optionally specify a list of `entities` for use in your context (like in Operations), as well as changing the auto-connect behavior (on by default).

```wasp title=todoApp.wasp
app todoApp {
  // ...

  webSocket: {
    fn: import { webSocketFn } from "@server/webSocket.js",

>     entities: [], // optional

Reviewer: I would consider just passing all the entities here automatically, and not having user to specify them. Because we have one global websocket, for whole app, so I don't see much use in explicitly mentioning which entities it uses.
If not now, we can possibly do it in the future, but I think it makes sense to do from the DX side.

Reviewer 2: > I would consider just passing all the entities here automatically, and not having user to specify them. 

That's a good point, I remember us talking about it. 

I'll make the changes to receive all the available entities inside of context.

- `isConnected: boolean` for showing a display of the Socket.IO connection status.
  - Note: Wasp automatically connects and establishes a WebSocket connection from the client to the server by default, so you do not need to explicitly `socket.connect()` or `socket.disconnect()`. 
  - If you set `autoConnect: false` in your Wasp file, then you should call these as needed.

Additionally, there is a `useSocketListener: (event, callback) => void` hook which is used for registering event handlers. It takes care of unregistering on unmount.

All components using `useSocket` share the same underlying `socket`.

```tsx title=src/client/ChatPage.tsx
import React, { useState } from 'react'
import { useSocket, useSocketListener } from '@wasp/webSocket'

export const ChatPage = () => {
  const [messageText, setMessageText] = useState('')
  const [messages, setMessages] = useState<
    { id: string; username: string; text: string }[]
  >([])
  // The "socket" instance is typed with the types you defined on the server.
  const { socket, isConnected } = useSocket()

  // This is a type-safe event handler: "chatMessage" event and its payload type
  // are defined on the server.

>   useSocketListener('chatMessage', logMessage)

Reviewer: Nice, it is all already typed, awesome.

In the future I could imagine us wanting to define different sockets, that work with different sets of events -> but ok, that is for the future. Might be worth creating an issue for it, if we have good idea what to write. If you have some ideas here, pls open an issue, if not nvm.
